---
title: "Characterization of Energy Dissipation and Material Failure Mechanisms In High-Velocity Impact of Magnesium Alloys"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2024-11-17-characterization-energy-dissipation-mg-alloys
venue: "ASME 2024 International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition"
date: 2024-11-17
location: "Portland, Oregon, USA"
---

High/hyper-velocity impact analysis is of paramount importance in various fields, including defense, aerospace, and materials science. Applications range from projectiles striking land vehicles to supersonic aircrafts navigating through dusty atmospheres. The performance of materials under high/hyper-velocity impact can be exceptionally complex, with factors such as elastic, plastic, fracture, and hydrodynamic properties of the materials playing significant roles. Additionally, several mechanisms have been identified to explain the dissipation and partitioning of impact kinetic energy, including kinetic energy transfer to the target, strain energy and heat generations, phase transformations such as melting and vaporization, and plasma formation. Understanding these material deformation, failure and energy dissipation mechanisms is crucial for designing effective protective systems against high/hyper-velocity impacts. In this presentation, we will delve into how target materials fail and how impact energy dissipates under extreme velocity impact loads. Our investigation will focus on a few lightweight magnesium alloys impacted by a steel ball. These target materials undergo various treatments, including solutionizing with different solutes like aluminum and zinc, and modification through different heat treatments, such as peak aging. Via employing a high-fidelity, high-performance Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH) model, we model and simulate impact events with velocities of up to 3 km/s. Carefully calibrated plasticity, fracture, and equation of state models characterize the behaviors of both projectile and target across a wide range of strain rate and temperature. The SPH model will be firstly validated by comparison with experimental data in terms of back face deflection of the target, the residual terminal velocity of the projectile, and the size of the perforation hole. Subsequently, we will identify several key material deformation failure mechanisms, including elastic and plastic wave propagation, spalling, adiabatic shearing, lateral cracking, and material fragmentation. The distribution of the velocities of material fragments will be analyzed to assess the target's protective performance. Regarding the dissipation of impact kinetic energy, we will quantify contribution and partitioning in terms of kinetic energy, strain energy, and heat over the entire target and the projectile. Furthermore, we will analyze how these energy dissipation mechanisms spatially and temporally change by extracting specific material points in the target along the impact and the transverse directions. As a result, the transition regime of energy dissipation mechanisms will be characterized. Finally, parametric studies on impact velocity, obliquity, and plate thickness will be conducted to comprehensively explore their impacts on material failure and energy dissipation mechanisms. Through addressing these issues, we aim to enhance our understanding of high/hyper-velocity impact dynamics and inform the development of robust protective systems.
